miRNA target identification in Arabidopsis thaliana (#2463)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/mirna-target-finder/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: 'miRNA target indentification in Arabidopsis thaliana'
zenodo_link: 'https://zenodo.org/record/4606701'
tags:
    - miRNA
    - plants
questions:
- Which miRNAs are upregulated in response to brassinosteroids?
- Which genes are potential target of brassinosteroid-induced miRNAs?
objectives:
- Perform miRNA differential expression analysis
- Understand quasi-mapping-based Salmon method for quantifying the expression of transcripts using RNA-seq data
- Idenfity potential miRNAs involved in brassinosteroid-mediated regulation networks
time_estimation: '2H'
key_points:
- We learned to perform a miRNA differential expression analysis
- We used a quasi-mapping approach for quantifiying gene expression

> - We learned how to identify potential miRNA targets

Reviewer: they key points should be phrased more like conclusions, so instead of of "we learned how to identify miRNA targets" something more like "Doing X and Y enables identification of potential miRNA targets" , or  "A Quasi-mapping approach is useful for/because X" ..basically ask yourself what are the  3-10 things you hope people will learn/remember from this tutorial,

Author: Nice, thanks!

![miRNA biosynthesis](../../images/plant_mirna_synthesis.pong "Plant miRNA biosynthesis, homeostesis and mechanisms of action.")

miRNAs have been found to be important regulators of many physiological processes, such as stress and hormonal responses. Four factors justify the miRAS to be considered as master regulators of the plant response to the surrounding environment:

- Multiple miRNA genes are regulated under given enviromental conditions
- Computal predictions estimate that each miRNA regulates hundreds of genes
- The majority of plant miRNAs regulate the genes encoding for transcription factors (TFs)
- Targets include not only mRNAS bu also long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)

In plants, miRNAs can silence targets through RNA degradation as well as translational repression pathways, and unlike animals, a large proportion of miRNA and their targets have less than four mismatches. This feature has been exploited for developing miRNAs target prediction tools, providing an efficient approach to elucidate the miRNA-mediated regulatory networks, which can contribute to biotechnological solutions to improve crops productivity.

> 

Author: Yes, probably would be better :)

>
> 1. {% tool [FastQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/fastqc/fastqc/0.72+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: `Control mRNA`
> 2. Rename the outputs as `FastQC unprocessed control mRNA: RawData` and `FastQC unprocessed control mRNA: Webpage`
> 3. Repeat the previous step with the `BR treated mRNA` collection.
> 4. {% tool [Merge Collections](__MERGE_COLLECTION__) %} with the following parameters:
>    - In *"Input collections"*:
>        - *"1.Input Collections"*: `FastQC unprocessed control mRNA: RawData`
>        - *"2.Input Collections"*: `FastQC unprocessed BR treated mRNA: RawData`
> 5. {% tool [MultiQC](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multiqc/multiqc/1.8+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - In *"Results"*:
>      - *"Which tool was used generate logs?"*: `FastQC`
>      - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: select the output generated in the previous step.
>   - In *"Report title"*: `mRNA initial quality check`
> 4. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the generated HTML file
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>

> > Is there any parameters that indicate the need to process the samples in order to improve its quality?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Are there any parameters that indicate the need to process the samples in order to improve their quality?
```

>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >

> > > All parameters are within accepted limits. However, the adapter content shows the presence of universal adapters in our readings, which can be removed to avoid possible interferences at later stages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > All parameters are within acceptable limits. However, the adapter content shows the presence of universal adapters in our readings, which can be removed to avoid possible interferences at later stages.
```

> >
> >    ![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_adapter_01.png "Experimental design")
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> ### {% icon comment %} Comments
> Although our samples have adapters, we are not going to trim them in this case. We will explain the reason in the next section.
{: .comment}

## Quantification of gene expression: **Salmon**

> After performing the quality assessment of the reads, we can move on to quantifying the gene expression. The aim of this step is to identify which transcript each read comes from and the total number of reads associated with each transcript. In this tutorial we will use the [Salmon](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5600148/) tool for the quantification of mRNA transcripts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After performing the quality assessment of the reads, we can move on to quantifying the gene expression. The aim of this step is to identify which transcript each read comes from and the total number of reads associated with each transcript. In this tutorial, we will use the [Salmon](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5600148/) tool for the quantification of mRNA transcripts.
```

![Experimental design](../../images/salmon_logo.png)

> One of the characteristics of __Salmon__ is that it doesn't require to perform a base-to-base alignment, which is the time-consuming step of tools such as STAR and HISAT2. Salmon relies in the quasi-mapping concept, a new mapping technique that allows the rapid and accurate mapping of RNA-seq reads to a target transcriptome. Rather than a standard alignment, quasi-mapping seeks to find the best mappings for each read, and does so by finding minimal collections of dynamically sized, right-maximal, matching contexts between target and query positions ({% cite Srivastava2016 %})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the characteristics of __Salmon__ is that it doesn't require performing a base-to-base alignment, which is the time-consuming step of tools such as STAR and HISAT2. Salmon relies on the quasi-mapping concept, a new mapping technique that allows the rapid and accurate mapping of RNA-seq reads to a target transcriptome. Rather than a standard alignment, quasi-mapping seeks to find the best mappings for each read, and does so by finding minimal collections of dynamically sized, right-maximal, matching contexts between target and query positions ({% cite Srivastava2016 %})
```

> The quasi-mapping approach utilized by __Salmon__ requires a reference index to determine the position and orientation information for where the fragments best map prior to quantification. It allows to provide the transcriptome in a format that is easily and rapidly searchable. Therefore, it will allow us to quickly find the positions in the transcriptome where each of the reads originated.   

Reviewer 2: this hard to understand for me, especially the 'for where'

Author: This paragraph has been modified by Pavan, I think that now it is much more clear :)

{: .comment}

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Quantify gene expression with Salmon
>
> 1. {% tool [Salmon quant](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/salmon/salmon/0.14.1.2+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Select salmon quantification mode:"*: `Reads`
>        - *"Select a reference transcriptome from your history or use a built-in index?"*: `Use one from the history`
>            - In *"Salmon index"*:
>                - {% icon param-file %} *"Transcripts fasta file"*: `transcriptome_AtRTD2.fasta`
>        - In *"Data input"*:
>            - *"Is this library mate-paired?"*: `Single-end`
>                - {% icon param-file %} *"FASTQ/FASTA file"*: `Control mRNA`
>        - *"Validate mappings"*: `Yes`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"File containing a mapping of transcripts to genes"*: `annotation_AtRTD2.gtf`
>
> 3. Rename the outputs as `Salmon control mRNA (Quantification)` and `Salmon control mRNA (Gene Quantification)`

> > 2. Repeat the previous procedure by using the `BR treated mRNA` dataset

Reviewer 2: the numbers are swapped?

Author: It seems so :)

>
>   > ### {% icon comment %} Quasi-mapping sequence requeriments
>   > Trimming the reads is not required  when using this method, since if there are k-mers in the reads that are not in the hash table, they are not counted. Quantification of the reads is only as good as the quality of the reference transcriptome.
>   {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

Salmon generates two output from each read dataset: 

- Quantification: summarizes the quantifications by transcript
- Gene quantification: summarizes the quantification by gene

> Each output consist in a tabular dataset with five columns:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each output consists of a tabular dataset with five columns:
```

- Name: the name of the target transcript provided in the input transcriptome
- Length: the length of the target transcript

> - EffectiveLength: the computed effective length

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Effective Length: the computed effective length
```

Author: In that case, both words appear joined in the Salmon output file.

>    - *"How"*: `Select datasets per level`
>        - In *"Factor"*:
>            - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Factor"*
>                - *"Specify a factor name, e.g. effects_drug_x or cancer_markers"*: `effects_brassinolide`
>                - In *"Factor level"*:
>                    - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Factor level"*
>                        - *"Specify a factor level"*: `brassinolide`
>                        - {% icon param-file %} *"Counts file(s)"*: `Salmon control mRNA (Gene Quantification)`
>                    - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Factor level"*
>                        - *"Specify a factor level"*: `control`
>                        - {% icon param-file %} *"Counts file(s)"*: `Salmon BR treated mRNA (Gene Quantification)` 
>    - *"Choice of Input data"*: `TPM values (e.g. from kallisto, sailfish or salmon)`
>        - *"Program used to generate TPMs"*: `Salmon`
>        - *"Gene mapping format"*: `GTF/GFF3`
>            - {% icon param-file %} *"GTF/GFF3 annotation file"*: `annotation_AtRTD2.gtf`
> 2. Rename the outputs as `DESeq2 results mRNA` and `DESeq2 plots mRNA`
{: .hands_on}

> DESeq2 generated 2 outputs: a table with the normalized counts and graphical summary of the results. In order to evaluate the similarity of our samples, we are going to evaluate the Principal Component Analsys (PCA) plot. PCA allows evaluate the dominant directions of highest variability in the data. Thus, the samples subjected to the same conditions should cluster together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DESeq2 generated 2 outputs: a table with the normalized counts and a graphical summary of the results. To evaluate the similarity of our samples, we are going to evaluate the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) plot. PCA allows evaluating the dominant directions of the highest variability in the data. Thus, the samples subjected to the same conditions should cluster together.
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Filter"*: output of **DESeq2** {% icon tool %}
>    - *"With following condition"*: `c7<0.01`
> 2. Rename the output as `Statistically significant genes`
>
> 3. {% tool [Filter](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Filter"*: `Statistically significant mRNAs`
>    - *"With following condition"*: `c3>1`
> 4. Rename it as `Statistically downregulated mRNAs`
>
> 5. {% tool [Filter](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Filter"*: `Statistically significant genes`
>    - *"With following condition"*: `c3<-1`
> 6. Rename it as `Statistically upregulated mRNAs`
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. How many genes show statistically significant differential expression?
> 2. How many of them are upregulated? And downregulated?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. The total number of genes whose expression differential between the two experimental conditions is 163.
> > 2. Of them, 108 are downregulated by the BR treatment and 26 are upregulated.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
> > ### {% icon comment %} Comments

> > > The sum of genes considered as upregulated and downregulated is lower than the total number of genes whose expression is statistically different is due to fact that we have selected only those whose difference in transcript abundance is greater than a factor of 2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > The sum of genes considered as upregulated and downregulated is lower than the total number of genes whose expression is statistically different is due to the fact that we have selected only those whose difference in transcript abundance is greater than a factor of 2.
```

>    - In *"Column selections"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Column selections"*
>            - *"on column"*: `c3`
>            - *"in"*: `Descending order`
> 2. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the generated file
{: .hands_on}

![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_upregulated_genes.png "Top upregulated genes in response to brassinosteroids")

In order to functionally characterize the Arabidopsis genes, we can consult the [TAIR database](https://www.arabidopsis.org/index.jsp).

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> What is the biological function of BR6OX2, the most upregulated gene?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > BR60X2 encodes a cytochrome p450 enzyme that catalyzes the last reaction in the production of brassinolide. It is capable of converting 6-deoxocastasterone into castasterone, a C-6 oxidation, as well as the further conversion of castasterone into brassinolide (source: [TAIR database](https://www.arabidopsis.org/servlets/TairObject?name=at3g30180&type=locus)).
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

# miRNA differential expression analysis

> Once the differential expression analysis of mRNAs has been carried out, the next stage of our involve to analyze how miRNA expression is altered in response to brassinosteroids. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the differential expression analysis of mRNAs has been carried out, the next stage is to analyse how miRNA expression is altered in response to brassinosteroids. 
```

> 4. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the generated HTML file
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> Based on information provided by __MultiQC__, is it necessary to trimming/filtering the reads?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > 
> > 1. The report generated by __MultiQC__ indicates that three quality parameters show values outside the recommended limits: per sequence G/C content, overrepresented sequences and adapter content.
> >
> > ![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_GC_content.png " PCA plot of expression data from control and BR treated samples.")
> > ![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_overepresented.png " PCA plot of expression data from control and BR treated samples.")
> > ![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_adaptors.png " PCA plot of expression data from control and BR treated samples.")
> >
> > Particularly remarkable is the content of adapters, which are up to 80% of the readings in some samples. Given the abundance of adapters, one would expect that if we eliminate this source of contamination, the rest of the parameters would show a noticeable improvement.
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> To remove the adapters contamination, we will employ the __Trim Galore__ tool, a wrapper script around __Cutadapt__ and __FastQC__ which allows to automate quality and adapter trimming.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To remove the adapters contamination, we will employ the __Trim Galore__ tool, a wrapper script around __Cutadapt__ and __FastQC__ which automates quality and adapter trimming.
```

>   - In *"Report title"*: `miRNA trimmed quality check`
> 4. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the generated HTML file
>
{: .hands_on}

The evaluation of the report generated by __MultiQC__ after having processed the samples by __Trim Galore__ indicates that the G/C content has been successfully corrected, and that the adapter contamination has been eliminated. However, the samples still show a high degree of over-represented sequences.

![Overexpressed sequences](../../images/miRNA_overepresented_processed.png "Report of overexpressed sequences in the miRNA reads")

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> What do you think could be the cause of the high number of over-represented sequences?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> >  Two of the factors that may determine the abundance of overrepresented sequences are the existence of highly expressed miRNAs (Seco-Cervera et al. 2018), and the existence of highly conserved sequence motifs within the miRNA ({% cite Glazov2008 %}).
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

## miRNA quantification: **MiRDeep2**

> Quantification of miRNAs requires to use two different tools: __MiRDeep2 Mapper__  for preprocessing the readns, __MiRDeep2 Quantifier__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quantification of miRNAs requires to use two different tools: __MiRDeep2 Mapper__  for preprocessing the reads, __MiRDeep2 Quantifier__.
```

> The __MiRDeep2 Quantifier__  maps the deep sequencing reads to predefined miRNA precursors and determines by that the expression of the corresponding miRNAs. It is carry out in two steps: firstly the predefined mature miRNA sequences are mapped to the predefined precursors (optionally, predefined star sequences can be mapped to the precursors too). Then, the deep sequencing reads are mapped to the precursors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The __MiRDeep2 Quantifier__ tool maps the deep sequencing reads to predefined miRNA precursors and determines by that the expression of the corresponding miRNAs. It is carried out in two steps: firstly, the predefined mature miRNA sequences are mapped to the predefined precursors (optionally, predefined star sequences can be mapped to the precursors too). And second, the deep sequencing reads are mapped to the precursors.
```

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Task description

Reviewer 2: task description missing here

>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Deep sequencing reads"*: `Control miRNA trimmed`
>    - *"Remove reads with non-standard nucleotides"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Clip 3' Adapter Sequence"*: `Don't Clip`
>    - *"Collapse reads and/or Map"*: `Collapse reads`
> 2. Rename the output as `Collapsed control miRNA`
> 3. Repeat the previous stages by providing `BR treated miRNA trimmed`as input, and rename it as `Collapsed BR treated miRNA`.
>
> 4. {% tool [MiRDeep2 Quantifier](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/rnateam/mirdeep2_quantifier/rbc_mirdeep2_quantifier/2.0.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Collapsed deep sequencing reads"*: `Collapsed control miRNA`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Precursor sequences"*: `miRNA_stem-loop_seq.fasta`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Mature miRNA sequences"*: `mature_miRNA_AT.fasta`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Star sequences"*: `star_miRNA_seq.fasta`
> 5. Rename the outputS as `MirDeep2 control miRNA` and `MirDeep2 control miRNA (html)`.
> 6. Repeat the fourth step by providing `Collapsed BR treated miRNA` as input, and rename the outputs as `MirDeep2 BR treated miRNA` and `MirDeep2 BR treated miRNA (html)`
>
{: .hands_on}

> In order to be able to use the outputs generated by __MiRDeep2 Quantifier__ in the differential expression analysis it is necessary to modify the datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the outputs generated by __MiRDeep2 Quantifier__ in the differential expression analysis, it is necessary to modify the datasets.
```

>    - *"How"*: `Select datasets per level`
>        - In *"Factor"*:
>            - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Factor"*
>                - *"Specify a factor name, e.g. effects_drug_x or cancer_markers"*: `effects_brassinolide`
>                - In *"Factor level"*:
>                    - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Factor level"*
>                        - *"Specify a factor level"*: `brassinolide`
>                        - {% icon param-file %} *"Counts file(s)"*: `MiRDeep2 DE BR treated miRNA`
>                    - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Factor level"*
>                        - *"Specify a factor level"*: `control`
>                        - {% icon param-file %} *"Counts file(s)"*: `MiRDeep2 DE control miRNA` 
>    - *"Choice of Input data"*: `Count data (e.g. from HTSeq-count, featureCounts or StringTie)`
> 2. Rename the outputs as `DESeq2 results miRNA` and `DESeq2 plots miRNA`
> 3. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the `DESeq2 plots miRNA` file
{: .hands_on}

![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_PCA_2.png " PCA plot of expression data from control and BR treated miRNA samples.")

> As can be seen, in this case the samples are much less similar to each other. Likewise, the main axes account for only 47% and 19% of the total variation. This suggests that the effect of brassinosteroids on miRNA regulation is limited.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As can be seen, in this case, the samples are much less similar to each other. Likewise, the main axes account for only 47% and 19% of the total variation. This suggests that the effect of brassinosteroids on miRNA regulation is limited.
```

> 2. Rename the output as `Differentially expressed miRNAs`
>
> 3. {% tool [Filter](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Filter"*: `Differentially expressed miRNAs`
>    - *"With following condition"*: `c3<0`
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > In this case we have chosen to apply a much less restrictive filtering than in the previous case, since the samples have much greater diversity among themselves. Thus, we have applied a threshold of 0.05 on the p-value, instead of opting for a threshold of 0.01 on the adjusted p-value as in the case of total mRNA. This results in a much higher probability of false positives.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> How many miRNAs show statistically significant upregulation?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > Only four of the miRNAs are significantly overexpressed in response to brassinosteroids.
> > ![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_upregulated.png "Statistically significative upregulated miRNAs in response to brassinosteroids.")
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

# Identification of miRNA targets

> In order to identify potential targets of upregulated miRNAs, it is necessary to obtain the sequences of all genes in fasta format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To identify potential targets of upregulated miRNAs, it is necessary to obtain the sequences of all genes in FASTA format.
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Obtaining the gene sequences of downregulated mRNAs
>
> 1. {% tool [Cut](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_cut_tool/1.1.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"File to cut"*: `Statistically downregulated mRNAs`
>    - *"Cut by"*: `fields`
>        - *"List of Fields"*: `c['1']`
> 2. Rename the output as `mRNA ids`
> 3. {% tool [Filter FASTA](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/filter_by_fasta_ids/filter_by_fasta_ids/2.1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"FASTA sequences"*: `transcriptome_AtRTD2.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - *"Criteria for filtering on the headers"*: `List of IDs`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"List of IDs to extract sequences for: `mRNA ids`
>        - *"Match IDs by"*: `Custom regex pattern`
>           - *"Regex search pattern for ID"*: `.*GENE=(.*)\s.*$`
> 4. Rename it as `mRNA_downregulated_sequences.fasta`
> 5. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the `mRNA_downregulated_sequences.fasta`  file
{: .hands_on}

> Now we will now obtain the sequences of miRNAs whose expression is induced by brassinosteroids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we will obtain the sequences of miRNAs whose expression is induced by brassinosteroids.
```

>
> 1. {% tool [TargetFinder](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/rnateam/targetfinder/targetfinder/1.7.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input small RNA sequences file"*: `miRNA_upreguled_sequences.fasta`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Target sequence database file*": `mRNA_downregulated_sequences.fasta`
>    - *"Prediction score cutoff value"*: `5.0`
>    - *"Output format"*: `Tab-delimited format`
> 2. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the output of **TargetFinder**.
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. How many target genes have been identified?
> 2. Could you provide an explanation for this outcome?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. Unfortunately, we have not detected any target genes.
> > 2. The negative result of our analysis may be due to one of the following causes:
> > - Brassinosteroid-mediated regulation of gene expression does not involve miRNAs.
> > - The datasets didn't have  sufficient read depth to detect biologically important genes; sequencing below this threshold will reduce statistical power ({% cite Bass2019 %}).
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

> In order to test the second hypothesis, we will use the miRNA sequences obtained from the processing of the original datasets (remember that in order to ensure that the workflow ran in a reasonable time, we used subsamples of the original datasets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test the second hypothesis, we will use the miRNA sequences obtained from the processing of the original datasets (remember that in order to ensure that the workflow ran in a reasonable time, we used subsamples of the original datasets).
```

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Retrieve the sequences of upregulated miRNAs obtained form the original datasets

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Retrieve the sequences of upregulated miRNAs obtained from the original datasets
```

>
> 1. Import the files from Zenodo:
>
>    - Open the file {% icon galaxy-upload %} __upload__ menu
>    - Click of the **Paste/Fetch** button
>    - Copy the Zenodo links and press <kbd>Start</kbd>
>
> ```
> https://zenodo.org/record/4606701/files/upregulated_miRNA_BR_complete_dataset.fasta
> ```
>
> 2. Rename each dataset as `miRNA_sequences_original_dataset.fasta`.
>
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: identification of potential miRNA targets (round 2)
>
> 1. {% tool [TargetFinder](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/rnateam/targetfinder/targetfinder/1.7.0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input small RNA sequences file"*: `miRNA_sequences_original_dataset.fasta`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Target sequence database file*": `mRNA_downregulated_sequences.fasta`
>    - *"Prediction score cutoff value"*: `5.0`
>    - *"Output format"*: `Tab-delimited format`
> 2. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the output of **TargetFinder**.
{: .hands_on}

![Experimental design](../../images/miRNA_targets.png "Potential miRNA targets found by the targetFinder tool.")

> Congratulations! You have identified two potential genes involved in the brassinosteroid-miRNA regulatory network. According the bibliography, the gene AT5G63810 codify the BGAL10 protein, a member of the Glycosidase hydrolase family. On the other hand, the gene AT1G56660 codify a MAEBL domain protein, whose function has not been characterized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You have identified two potential genes involved in the brassinosteroid-miRNA regulatory network. According to the bibliography, the gene AT5G63810 codify the BGAL10 protein, a member of the Glycosidase hydrolase family. On the other hand, the gene AT1G56660 codify a MAEBL domain protein, whose function has not been characterized.
```

> Congratulations! You have identified two potential genes involved in the brassinosteroid-miRNA regulatory network. According the bibliography, the gene AT5G63810 codify the BGAL10 protein, a member of the Glycosidase hydrolase family. On the other hand, the gene AT1G56660 codify a MAEBL domain protein, whose function has not been characterized.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You have identified two potential genes involved in the brassinosteroid-miRNA regulatory network. According to the bibliography, the gene AT5G63810 codifies the BGAL10 protein, a member of the Glycosidase hydrolase family. On the other hand, the gene AT1G56660 codifies a MAEBL domain protein, whose function has not been characterized.
```

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), mainly 20–22 nucleotide small RNAs (sRNAs), are characterized for regulating gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. miRNAs are distinguished from other sRNAs by being generated from precursor harboring an imperfect stem‐loop structure. Unlike in animals, the pre-processing of plant miRNA occurs in the nucleus (fig.2). The pre-miRNAs are then exported to the cytoplasm after methylation and incorporated into the Argonaute 1 protein to form RISC (RNA-induced silencing complex). The miRNA itself does not have the ability to cleave mRNAs or interfere with translation, but it plays a role in scanning the appropriate target. 

> ![fig2:miRNA biosynthesis](../../images/plant_mirna_synthesis.png "Plant miRNA biosynthesis, homeostesis and mechanisms of action ({% cite Wang2019 %}).")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![fig2:miRNA biosynthesis](../../images/plant_mirna_synthesis.png "Plant miRNA biosynthesis, homeostasis and mechanisms of action ({% cite Wang2019 %}).")
```

>                    - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Factor level"*
>                        - *"Specify a factor level"*: `control`
>                        - {% icon param-file %} *"Counts file(s)"*: `MiRDeep2 DE control miRNA`
>    - *"Choice of Input data"*: `Count data (e.g. from HTSeq-count, featureCounts or StringTie)`
> 2. Rename the outputs as `DESeq2 results miRNA` and `DESeq2 plots miRNA`
> 3. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the `DESeq2 plots miRNA` file
{: .hands_on}

![fig13PCA miRNA](../../images/miRNA_PCA_2.png " PCA plot of expression data from control and BR treated miRNA samples.")

As can be seen, in this case, the samples are much less similar to each other. Likewise, the main axes account for only 47% and 19% of the total variation. This suggests that the effect of brassinosteroids on miRNA regulation is limited (fig.12).

## Filter significantly upregulated miRNAs

To conclude the analysis of the differential expression of miRNAs, we will extract those transcripts that show a significant induction of expression in response to brassinosteroids.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Filter upregulated miRNAs
>

> > 1. {% tool [Filter](Filter1) %} data on any column using simple expressions (Galaxy Version 1.1.1) with the following parameters: with the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 1. {% tool [Filter](Filter1) %} data on any column using simple expressions (Galaxy Version 1.1.1) with the following parameters:
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Target sequence database file*": `mRNA_downregulated_sequences.fasta`
>    - *"Prediction score cutoff value"*: `5.0`
> 2. Click on the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon and inspect the output of **TargetFinder**.
{: .hands_on}

![fig14:Targets miRNA](../../images/miRNA_targets.png "Potential miRNA targets found by the TargetFinder tool.")

Congratulations! You have identified two potential genes involved in the brassinosteroid-miRNA regulatory network. 

The gene [AT5G63810](https://www.arabidopsis.org/servlets/TairObject?id=133285&type=locus) codifies the BGAL10 protein, a member of the glycosidase  hydrolase family. According the bibliography, this protein is involved in xyloglucan metabolism, a polysaccharide constituent of plant cell walls, and its downregulation could contribute to a delay in fruit ripening as a result of the maintenance of the structural integrity of the cell wall ({% cite Miedes2010 %}).

On the other hand, the gene [AT1G56660](https://www.arabidopsis.org/servlets/TairObject?id=29512&type=locus) codifies a MAEBL domain protein, whose function has not been characterized.

> ### {% icon comment %} Comments

> > One of the hypothesis that we could propose from our results is: the inhibition of the BGAL10 protein translation can result in plants with improved resistante to droght conditions. Is it possible to validate it? Yes! We proporse this approach: to adquire [AT5G63810 mutant seeds](https://abrc.osu.edu/stocks?search%5Btaxon%5D=Arabidopsis+thaliana&search%5Bsearch_text%5D=AT5G63810&search%5Bmaterial_type%5D%5B%5D=seed&search%5Bsearch_fields%5D=All) and [wild type seeds](http://arabidopsis.info/StockInfo?NASC_id=N1093), grow them under two controlled conditions: watering and drought, and anayze plant weight after 33 days (fig.15).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> One of the hypotheses that we could propose from our results is: the inhibition of the BGAL10 protein translation can result in plants with improved resistance to drought conditions. Is it possible to validate it? Yes! We propose this approach: to acquire [AT5G63810 mutant seeds](https://abrc.osu.edu/stocks?search%5Btaxon%5D=Arabidopsis+thaliana&search%5Bsearch_text%5D=AT5G63810&search%5Bmaterial_type%5D%5B%5D=seed&search%5Bsearch_fields%5D=All) and [wild type seeds](http://arabidopsis.info/StockInfo?NASC_id=N1093), grow them under two controlled conditions: watering and drought, and analyze plant weight after 33 days (fig.15).
```

```

__BR treated mRNA samples:__
```
https://zenodo.org/record/4606701/files/SRR1019438_RNASEQ_BL.fastqsanger.gz
https://zenodo.org/record/4606701/files/SRR1019439_RNASEQ_BL.fastqsanger.gz
```

## Additional datasets

In addition to the RNA-Seq reads obtained from the NCBI database, we will use datasets from two sources:

- [AtRTD2](https://ics.hutton.ac.uk/atRTD/) is a high-quality transcript reference dataset developed to exploit the accuracy of transcript quantification tools such as __Salmon__ and __Kallisto__ in analyzing _Arabidopsis_ RNA-Seq data.
- [PmiREN](http://pmiren.com/) is a comprehensive functional plant miRNA database that includes more than 20,000 annotated miRNAs diverse plant species.

# miRNA data analysis

## Get data

The first step of our analysis consists of retrieving the miRNA-Seq datasets from Zenodo and organizing them into collections.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Retrieve miRNA-Seq datasets
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
> 2. Import the files from Zenodo:
>
>    - Open the file {% icon galaxy-upload %} __upload__ menu
>    - Click on __Collection__ tab
>    - Click of the **Paste/Fetch** button

> >    - Copy the Zenodo links included in the `Control miRNA samples` section and press <kbd>Start</kbd> and <kbd>Build</kbd>

Reviewer 4: 1. is there a reason to have the miRNA samples above? And not listed here  where you need to copy them? It feels weird to go back up
2. Would it make sense to switch this to using the rule based uploader? You've got quite a few URLs, you could make them into a table and provide some copy-pasteable rules?

Author: The samples are at the beginning only in order to include them in the _Background on data section_, but sure,  it would be better to move it. I'll include the rule base upload too.

Reviewer 4: ahhh ok, makes sense to also list them there then, but yeah doing the entire creation process with the RBU might be a nice feature that students can learn about? Otherwise yeah, awesome! looking forward to this :)

Author: Sure, I included it, much better now :)
